Digimon and Pokemon seem to share a lot
of similarities fans of both would be
quick to tell you that the two worlds
are actually quite different but they
were Journeys they are both
franchises from Japan they both feature
a metamorphosis-like power-up called
Evolution they both have mon in their
names in reference to the word monster
they both dropped around the same time
from the mid to late 90s and they both
really blew up here in the United States
around the turn of the century despite
having an obvious affinity for Pokemon
I've got a lot of great things to say
about the other mon franchise the early
Digimon Adventure anime had a
significantly better story and character
Arc compared to Pokemon and it was just
a straight up better show and while
their catalog isn't as deep as Pokemons
there are a lot of great Digimon video
games out there and I especially enjoyed
the recent cyber sleuth titles but one
thing is very different between the two
franchises for me and that comes with
the trading card game I'm a card game
guy we literally started this channel by
talking about card games one of these
two card games is one of the absolute
largest on the planet lining Hobby and
chain stores constantly updating a
digital video game client and hosting a
worldwide tournament series every year
the other didn't even last two years
what on Earth went wrong let's talk
about it
[Music]
today's video is sponsored by Dollar
Shave Club they're helping us get that
bread and they're helping me with a
problem that I've got the same way that
Digimon can grow more powerful and
change forms over time I always figured
my facial hair would do the same there's
just one problem instead what I got was
this thankfully Dollar Shave Club has
you covered for all your grooming needs
shower Oral Care deodorant and most
importantly shaving Dollar Shave Club
sent me their ultimate shave starter set
which is a great way to deal with all
things shaving in one spot the set
includes their weighty executive handle
with high quality six blades one ounce
of Dr Carver's prep scrub to exfoliate
dead skin cells and help prevent ingrown
hairs one to Dr Carver's shea butter to
give you a close shave with zero razor
bumps and my personal favorite Dr
Carver's po shave do to provide
hydration and refresh your skin at the
end of The Journey despite close the
shave was the do reduced my usual po
shave redness a ton if you're interested
in helping the show or maybe devolving
your own neckbeard visit
dollarshaveclub.com thejewitz to get the
ultimate shave starter set for only five
bucks and round out your personal
grooming routine by adding any other
high quality products after that the
restock monk ships full-size products at
regular price
in order to understand why the
international Digimon card game
otherwise known as the digibattle card
game was a complete Nutter failure we
first need to talk about the original
Japanese card game it's based on to this
day it's one of the most beloved and
supported aspects of Digimon in its Home
Country the original Japanese Digimon
card game goes by many names its
official title is simply the digital
monster card game abbreviated to digikaw
for short it's probably most known in
the west by its rule set title hyper
Coliseum which I'll be using for the
rest of this video hyper Coliseum was
made by Bandai and released in 1999
which was a prime time to strike for TCG
popularity Magic the Gathering in the
Pokemon TCG were the only real Global
TCG hits at the time and the Japanese
Market was proving that there was
absolutely room for more hyper Coliseum
released almost right alongside konami's
Yu-Gi-Oh which would become an
international hit that's still printed
today but in an ironic and somewhat
relevant twist Bandai actually printed
the first you Geo trading card game in
1998 before losing the license to Konami
this is right around the time that
Yu-Gi-Oh shifted from a series about all
games into one that was just about card
games and eyes Yu-Gi-Oh card game was to
put it kindly absolute trash they didn't
have a ton of Rich card game based
Source material to go off of so their
Yu-Gi-Oh game pretty much became a game
of fancy War you threw down cards High
numbers win it's a baby game the reason
that bandai's Yu-Gi-Oh is relevant here
is that digimon's hyper Coliseum feels
like a direct upgrade to it it's still
fancy War where two players try and
throw down higher numbers at each other
to win battles but there's a much more
robust system of evolution types
abilities option cards and just overall
strategy players spend each turn
planning cards to evolve or add boosts
and then they conduct a battle one of
the things that makes this game unique
is that both players take their turns
almost simultaneously instead of waiting
for your opponent to finish their turn
before you can act it's kind of funny
because 20 years later I'm playing
Legends of runetera and thinking oh
that's pretty cool but they were doing
this back in 1999 the Digimon themselves
are generally grouped by their three
primary types A for vaccine B for data
and C for virus they fudge the original
Digimon rules a little here but in
general these three types work in a rock
paper scissors triangle in hyper
Coliseum you and your opponent each
fight with just one monster at a time
evolving it up or swapping it over the
course of the game each monster has
three different attack types which
change depending on what type your
opponent is a attacks are the strongest
and C are the weakest but using a c
attack brings your opponent's a attack
down to zero so it works as a counter
like Yu-Gi-Oh hyper Coliseum offers a
limited number of slots for sitting face
down non-monster cards called option
cards here your option cards are then
sprung into battle one at a time ideally
allowing you to boost your attack score
or change your attack type in order to
win that round of battle the loser of
each round of combat loses score which
drops in multiples of 10 from 100 down
to 0 Pro just like Magic's life or
Yu-Gi-Oh's life points the player that
drops to zero points first loses there's
also an interesting Clause that promotes
Resource Management instead of losing
when your deck Runs Out Of Cards like in
most major card games here you're forced
to devolve your Digimon to its lower
stage and then you'll create a new deck
from your discard pile since deck size
is only 30 cards and you refill your
hand to six cards of return keeping a
tab on important remaining tech cards is
crucial hyper Coliseum is by no means
perfectly balanced or even perfectly
designed but it's quick fun and themed
well around the way that battles between
Digimon and Tamers happened in the show
oh yeah this game was a major influence
for the Digimon Tamers anime series
these cards were so popular in Japan
that they became a major part of actual
Digimon Canon one of the most crucial
things that supported hyper Coliseum
right out of the gates was organized
play and I ran frequent tournaments for
the game in various Japanese hobby shops
getting
jeans against new meta games these old
tournaments were surprisingly well
documented despite starting as early as
the year 2000 and if you're interested
in learning more about the history of
the tournaments themselves I highly
recommend reading this article written
at digimonworld.org I've left a link for
it in the description but it's a great
read if you're interested in the topic
of the Digimon card game whatsoever
having a competitive Community around a
card game is huge giving your players
the option to attend tournaments or
events in order to play your card game
is what can really push someone from a
casual collector into a lifelong fan and
participant new hyper Coliseum card sets
were printed frequently and were
released in a variety of formats
including starter decks with exclusive
cards traditional booster packs and
bandai's very own vending machine system
cardass
okay I know it's pronounced like
kadudasu in Japanese but when they spell
it out in English it's just card ass you
cannot unsee it hyper Coliseum ran in
Japan from 1999 until 2005 with over 15
starter decks and 25 booster sets that's
a respectable run in its own right but
even that number is deceivingly low in
fact the original hyper Coliseum game
still gets new cards now almost every
year starting around 2013 OG green card
back hyper Coliseum cards have been
printed in several promotional packs the
these bad boys dropped just last year
for the 20th anniversary of the game in
2019. look at that brand new cards same
old card ass there's this whole dead
demon community
never got anything close to outside of
Japan while Japan celebrates their card
games 20th anniversary it's been almost
20 years since the English card game
died
before we drop a massive dump on the
English card game I do briefly want to
talk about the history of the Digimon
card game video games
at the turn of the century video
streaming over the internet was still in
its absolute infancy so if you wanted to
learn how to play a card game in the
late 90s you had two options you could
do a bunch of reading and hope you
comprehended everything or you could
just learn the game through a video game
one of these two options is a lot more
fun when I was growing up one of the
first ways I really started to get into
the Pokemon TCG was through the Pokemon
trading card game for Game Boy and the
Pokemon play it PC game oh yes it's that
game
it's so easy to clown on these cutscenes
but I promise the actual gameplay was a
legit way to learn this game and while
early Yu-Gi-Oh games didn't quite follow
the rules that we know today they
eventually made a million different
games that did so you might be wondering
was there a good resource to learn the
Digimon card game through video game
plan you bet there was in Japan
introducing the digital monster card
game it's portable it's got great pixel
art and it follows the original rules
for a satisfying campaign just one
problem Digimon was band ice thing so of
course it had to go on bandai's
exclusive console that's right the
Franken Wonder Swan there's a good
chance you've probably never seen this
thing in your life and that's because
the system Never released in the West
this obscure portable device was
bandai's attempt to compete with
Nintendo's Game Boy it had great battery
life and it was more powerful than a
regular Game Boy it did sell a couple
million units but its market share was
virtually destroyed in Japan by the time
the more powerful Game Boy Advance
dropped because this game is Japan only
and on an extremely obscure japan-only
platform most western Digimon fans have
never played it there is a chance though
that you've played a Digimon card video
game this bad boy Digimon World Digimon
card battle what we received in the west
is technically the second of two
PlayStation Digimon card games from
Japan both of these games feature a side
storyline and campaign that at first
glance looks just like hyper Coliseum
however when you take a closer look it's
definitely its own animal it still uses
the one-on-one battling and the rock
paper scissors attack structure but
that's one of the few things these games
have in common Digimon monsters have
their own individual hit point values in
this game and you always choose which of
your three attacks that you're going to
do digivolving Works differently the
deck doesn't recycle when you run out of
cards and the win conditions are also
completely different this game had kind
of a double-edged sword there's awesome
3D animations for all your favorite
Digimon when they battle but the
animations are so slow that if you want
to plow through the campaign you'll
eventually turn them off give me any
video game with pack opening card
collecting and deck building and I'll
have a good time with that said this
game did not tie into the physical card
game or help players play the physical
card game in any way and that's going to
help us transition into the final
chapter of today's story
I've tried to gather every reason that I
could find to figure out why the Digimon
card game failed in the west despite
succeeding in Japan so we can go ahead
and drop one reason down already boom no
video game tie-in to help learn the game
but let's move on to the physical card
game itself at first glance the cards
seem pretty similar to the Japanese ones
but the closer you look the more you'll
realize that digibandal is a dark fun
house mirror Distortion of hyper
Coliseum arguably the biggest misstep
for the digibattle card game comes from
the way that the cards were distributed
and I ended up using Upper Deck as their
main distributor for the game in the
west especially North America upper deck
was a massive distributor of trading
cards but they printed almost zero
trading card games almost every product
that they had handled up to this point
were sports cards I'm not sure which of
the two companies is at fault here but
did you battle had a really low
distribution of cards an actual card and
hobby shops sure they were easy enough
to find at Major retailers like Walmart
and Target but I never once saw the card
game at a game store the way that I did
it for things like Pokemon Magic the
Gathering and Yu-Gi-Oh by far the
largest setback for Digimon card
distribution came when Bandai and upper
deck split up after just two booster
pack sets Bandai split from upper deck
and said fine I'll do it myself there
was a sizable delay between booster set
2 and booster set 3 during the company
switchover which absolutely murdered
what little momentum the game had very
early into its lifespan to add further
confusion to it all Digimon card's
booster set 3 and onward were redesigned
they had a very different look in the
front and even slightly different card
backs between the delays and card swaps
this third series and onward for the
Digimon card game was printed a lot less
than the first two and they've become
genuinely hard to collect today because
of it Japan's game Saw 26 booster packs
not including the newer promotional sets
in the west they got six
by 2002 digibattle was scrapped and
Bandai began producing a completely
different casual card game called
detector and then about a year after
that there was the Western exclusive and
uncreatively named Digimon collectible
card game none of these games lasted
very long but it still blows my mind how
quickly they struck out when copying
that original successful Japanese
formula
while some players at stores might have
had their own decks or their own
tournaments there was nothing official
to bring fans together he
man's choice of distributor in the west
Wizards of the Coast really shined Magic
the Gathering was practically built on
the foundation of hobby shop tournaments
and get-togethers and they leveraged
that knowledge quickly with Pokemon
creating league play in tournaments
where players could meet other fans
share strategies and collect promotional
merch I even saw commercials for them on
TV my family went to them all the time
and it's a major reason I ended up
getting into the competitive card game
eventually in 2003 Pokemon cut ties with
Wizards of the Coast they said fine I'll
do it myself but they did continue
running leagues like Wizards did and
their tournaments and organized play
continued to expand year after year and
yet another interesting fact bringing us
back to a familiar place upper deck got
their chance with a new trading card
game in 2002. unlike Digimon Upper Deck
entertainment wasted no time in making
sure that Yugioh consistently supported
with league and tournament play look at
all these tournament reports on pojo.com
Digimon had nothing like this Yu-Gi-Oh
fans today might notice that Upper Deck
doesn't run the game anymore in the West
in fact they haven't for over 10 years
that's a whole video for a whole nother
day but oh man they messed up they
messed up so bad and then of course
Konami said fine I'll do it myself
digibattle looks a lot like hyper
Coliseum and they literally took the
card design from Japan's hyper Coliseum
but for some Unholy unspeakable reason
they took a perfectly functional and
perfectly working trading card game and
they changed the rules a lot almost
every change they made to the game makes
the game worse in my opinion and it's
absolutely baffling the biggest change
by far is that instead of bringing your
opponent's life points down to zero to
win you collect points and go up to win
in this one I have no clue why they
completely inverted the main objective
of the game but it creates all kinds of
wild interactions that weren't
originally intended for example some of
the strongest Megas in the early
Japanese metagame were able to heal your
life points by evolving them in the
English game they score instead you can
damage someone to undo a heal in the
Japanese game but you can't undo
somebody scoring in English another
bizarre change is that they did away
with the exact same ABC system the new
circle diamond Square setup looks the
same but it's odd to say the least that
old wall that lets see attacks turn a
attacks to zero power is gone completely
altering the interactions that some of
the original cards had in hyper Coliseum
you filled your hand to six cards a turn
in digibattle you draw up to ten ten
freaking cards in a game with 30 card
decks you're gonna spend each turn of
this game looking like the Uno meme guy
with that much draw you're almost
guaranteed to access busted cards every
turn and you know how the Japanese game
had those three option zones where you
picked three and only three spots for
your option cards before a battle those
are gone you can play an unlimited
amount of options every turn now and
instead you and your opponent just take
turns slapping them down it's just
straight up card game gluttony like I
said the Japanese version of the game is
not a masterpiece but it's a fun light
game with some strategy elements this
game is Just chaos literally everything
that made this game cherished in Japan
from constant releases to official
tournaments to video games to actual
mechanics of the actual game Were Lost
in Translation along the way these two
cards might look the same but their
stories are a world apart I can't help
but think about how things could have
been different if they handled the
international card game for Digimon
better but as always thank you so much
for watching my content I guess we've
got a bit of a trend going on this
channel where we look at the history of
dead tabletop games and I always enjoy
researching and digging up this kind of
stuff I'll see you guys next time with
more gaming content
[Music]
foreign